# Introduzione
<!-- lezione 1 - 2023-02-28 slide 001-024 -->

## Definizioni

An **alphabet** is a finite and not empty set of symbols. The set of all strings over an alphabet is denoted by $Σ^*$. Some examples could be:

- $\sigma = \{0, 1\}$, is the set of symbols in binary codes.
- $\sigma = \{α, β, γ, ..., ω\}$, is the set of symbols in the greek alphabet.

A **string** is a finite sequence of symbols from an alphabet. Some examples could be:

- $a = 010101$, is a string over $\sigma = \{0, 1\}$.
- $b = αβγ$, is a string over $\sigma = \{α, β, γ, ..., ω\}$.

In particular we refer as the length of a string to the number of symbols in it. The empty string is a string of length 0.

An **empty string** is a string of length 0. The empty string is denoted by $\epsilon$.

An alphabet closure is the set of all strings over an alphabet, we can represent as:

- closure operator (Kleene) __*__
- positive closure operator __+__

The closure operator is given by the union of the positive closure operator and the empty string: $Σ^* = Σ^+ \cup \{\epsilon\}$.

A **language** is a set of strings over a given alphabet.


<!-- lezione 2 . 2023-03-02 slide xxx-yyy -->

Questions:

- In the Chomsky hierarchy, what is the relation between type-n languages and type-(n+1) languages?
- _If a language can be generated by a type-1 grammar, can the same language be generated also by a type2 grammar?_ 
- why type-1 grammar is said monotonic?
- according to the given definitions, can a type-n grammar with n>0 generate a language that includes the empty string ϵ?
- is it possible to introduce further restrictions on regular grammars? what happens if we do it?

:::caution
A language with S->ε is not an empty language, but a language with only the empty character.
:::

## Regular sets

We can have some different ways to show a language, therefore there are  several grammars for the same language. This is the reason why is not easy to define a grammar specific for a determined language.

A regular set is a set of strings that can be generated by a regular grammar. A regular grammar is a grammar that can generate a regular set. 

If we know that some sets are regular, then we can use regular expressions to describe them.

As an example we can describe as regular sets:

- the empty set ∅
- the set {ϵ} containing only the empty string ϵ
- the set {a} containing any symbol $a$ from ∑

If p and q are regular sets over ∑, the same is true for:

- the union $ P ∪ Q = {x | x ∈ P or x ∈ Q}$
- the concatenation $ P Q = {x y | x ∈ P, y ∈ Q} $
- the closures $P*$ and $Q*$

slide 26

- the set of strings over {0,1} containing two 1’s 
	0*10*10*
- the strings over {0,1} without consecutive equal symbols
	(1 | e) (01)* (0 | e )
- the set of decimal characters
	digit  = 0 | 1 | 2 | ... | 9
- the set of strings representing decimal integers
	digit digit*
- the set of alphabetic characters
	letter  = A | B | ... | Z | a | b | ... | z
- the set of strings representing identifiers
	letter ( letter | digit )*

regular expressions are representations of regular sets.

slide 29

<!-- lezione 2023-03-07 -->

## DFA

A DFA is a 5-tuple (Q, ∑, δ, q0, F) where:

- $Q$ is a finite set of states.
- $∑$ is a finite set of **input** symbols.
- $δ$ is a transition function that maps each state and each input symbol to a state, how the state changes when an input arrives.
- $q_0$ is the **start** state.
- $F$ is a set of **final** states.

We can define the delta function for enumerations: